Initial CUDA C++ Execution Model documentation (#3873)
NVIDIA/cccl: docs/libcudacxx/extended_api/execution_model.rst

.. _libcudacxx-extended-api-execution-model:

Execution model
===============

CUDA C++ aims to provide `_parallel forward progress_ [intro.progress.9] <https://eel.is/c++draft/intro.progress#9>`__ 

> for all device threads of execution, making the parallelization of pre-existing C++ applications with CUDA C++ straight-forward.

Reviewer: straightforward

Author: ```suggestion
for all device threads of execution, making the parallelization of pre-existing C++ applications with CUDA C++ straightforward.
```

Host threads
------------

The forward-progress provided by threads of execution created by the host implementation to
execute `main <https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/main_function>`__, `std::thread <https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/thread/thread>`__,
and `std::jthread https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/thread/jthread>`__ is implementation-defined behavior of the host
implementation `[intro.progress] <https://eel.is/c++draft/intro.progress>`__. 
General-purpose host implementations should provide _concurrent forward progress_.

If the host implementation provides `_concurrent forward progress_ [intro.progress.7] <https://eel.is/c++draft/intro.progress#7>`__,
then CUDA C++ provides `_parallel forward progress_ [intro.progress.9] <https://eel.is/c++draft/intro.progress#9>`__ for device threads.

.. _libcudacxx-extended-api-execution-model-device-threads:

Device threads
--------------

Once a device thread makes progress:

- If the device thread is part of a `Cooperative Grid <https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-runtime-api/group__CUDART__EXECUTION.html#group__CUDART__EXECUTION_1g504b94170f83285c71031be6d5d15f73>`__,

>   then all device-threads in its grid shall eventually make progress.

Author: ```suggestion
  then all device threads in its grid shall eventually make progress.
```

> _ Otherwise, all device-threads in its `thread-block cluster <https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-c-programming-guide/index.html#thread-block-clusters>`__ 

Author: ```suggestion
_ Otherwise, all device threads in its `thread-block cluster <https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-c-programming-guide/index.html#thread-block-clusters>`__ 
```

  shall eventually make progress.
  
  [Note: Threads in other thread-block clusters are not guaranteed to eventually make progress. - end note.]
  [Note: This implies that all device-threads in its thread block shall eventually make progress. - end note.]

The order in which device threads eventually get a chance to make progress is _unspecified_.

> Modify `[intro.progress.1] <https://eel.is/c++draft/intro.progress>`__ as follows:

Author: ```suggestion
Modify `[intro.progress.1] <https://eel.is/c++draft/intro.progress>`__ as follows (modifications in **bold**):
```

The implementation may assume that any **host** thread will eventually do one of the following:

    1. terminate,

>     2. invoke the function `std::his_thread::yield <https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/thread/yield>`__ (`[thread.thread.this] <http://eel.is/c++draft/thread.thread.this>`__),

Author: ```suggestion
    2. invoke the function `std::this_thread::yield <https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/thread/yield>`__ (`[thread.thread.this] <http://eel.is/c++draft/thread.thread.this>`__),
```

    3. make a call to a library I/O function,
    4. perform an access through a volatile glvalue,
    5. perform a synchronization operation or an atomic operation, or
    6. continue execution of a trivial infinite loop (`[stmt.iter.general] <http://eel.is/c++draft/stmt.iter.general>`__).

**The implementation may assume that any device thread will eventually do one of the following:**

    1. **terminate**,
    2. **make a call to a library I/O function**,
    3. **perform an access through a volatile glvalue except if the designated object has automatic storage duration, or**
    4. **perform a synchronization operation or an atomic read operation except if the designated object has automatic storage duration.**

> 

Author: ```suggestion

    [Note: We consider some of the current limitations of device threads with respect to host 
    threads implementation bugs, e.g., the undefined behavior introduced by programs that 
    eventually only perform volatile or atomic operations on objects with automatic storage 
    duration. However, we consider that some of the limitations are due to the C++ standard
    currently being too strict, and this resulting in the performance of common workloads
    being degraded to provide forward progress to “useless” programs, e.g., the undefined
    behavior introduced by programs that eventually only perform atomic write operations
    or fences. - end note.]
```

.. dropdown:: Examples of forward progress guarantee differences between host and device threads due to modifications to [intro.progress.1].

    The following examples refer to the itemized sub-clauses of the implementation assumptions for host and device threads above
    using "host.threads.<id>" and "device.threads.<id>", respectively.

    .. code:: cuda
        // Example: Execution.Model.Device.0
        // Outcome: grid eventually terminates per device.threads.4 because the atomic object does not have automatic storage duration.
        __global__ void ex0(cuda::atomic_ref<int, cuda::thread_scope_device> atom) {
            if (threadIdx.x == 0) {
                while(atom.load(cuda::memory_order_relaxed) == 0);
            } else if (threadIdx.x == 1) {
                atom.store(1, cuda::memory_order_relaxed);
            }
        }

    .. code:: cuda
        // Example: Execution.Model.Device.1
        // Allowed outcome: No thread makes progress because device threads don't support host.threads.2.

>         __global__ void ii() {

Author: ```suggestion
        __global__ void ex1() {
```

            while(true) std::this_thread::yield();
        }

    .. code:: cuda
        // Example: Execution.Model.Device.2
        // Allowed outcome: No thread makes progress because device threads don't support host.threads.4
        // for objects with automatic storage duration (see exception in device.threads.3).

>         __global__ void iv() {

Author: ```suggestion
        __global__ void ex2() {
```

            volatile bool True = true;
            while(True);
        }

    .. code:: cuda
        // Example: Execution.Model.Device.3
        // Allowed outcome: No thread makes progress because device threads don't support host.threads.5
        // for objects with automatic storage duration (see exception in device.threads.4).

>         __global__ void v_atomic_automatic() {

Author: ```suggestion
        __global__ void ex3() {
```

            cuda::atomic<bool, cuda::thread_scope_thread> True = true;
            while(True.load());
        }

    .. code:: cuda
        // Example: Execution.Model.Device.4
        // Allowed outcome: No thread makes progress because device threads don't support host.thread.6.
        __global void ex4() {
            while(true) { /* empty */ }
        }

.. _libcudacxx-extended-api-execution-model-cuda-apis:

CUDA APIs
---------

> Any CUDA API shall eventually either return or ensure at least one device-thread makes progress.

Author: ```suggestion
Any CUDA API shall eventually either return or ensure at least one device thread makes progress.
```

CUDA query functions (e.g. `cudaStreamQuery <https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-runtime-api/group__CUDART__STREAM.html#group__CUDART__STREAM_1g2021adeb17905c7ec2a3c1bf125c5435>`__,
`cudaEventQuery <https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-runtime-api/group__CUDART__EVENT.html#group__CUDART__EVENT_1g2bf738909b4a059023537eaa29d8a5b7>`__, etc.) shall not consistently 

> return ``cudaErrorNotReady`` without a device-thread making progress.

Author: ```suggestion
return ``cudaErrorNotReady`` without a device thread making progress.
```

> [Note: The device-thread need not be "related" to the API call, e.g., an API operating on one stream or process may ensure progress of a device-thread on another stream or process. - end note.]

Author: ```suggestion
[Note: The device thread need not be "related" to the API call, e.g., an API operating on one stream or process may ensure progress of a device-thread on another stream or process. - end note.]
```

> [Note: The device thread need not be "related" to the API call, e.g., an API operating on one stream or process may ensure progress of a device-thread on another stream or process. - end note.]

Author: ```suggestion
[Note: The device thread need not be "related" to the API call, e.g., an API operating on one stream or process may ensure progress of a device thread on another stream or process. - end note.]
```

      To eventually fulfill this requirement means that this will happen in an unspecified but finite amount of time. — end note]

    - `[intro.progress.9] <https://eel.is/c++draft/intro.progress>`__: For a thread of execution providing
      `parallel forward progress guarantees <https://eel.is/c++draft/intro.progress#9>`__, the implementation is not required to ensure that
      the thread will eventually make progress if it has not yet executed any execution step; once this thread has executed a step,
      it provides concurrent forward progress guarantees.

      [Note 6: This does not specify a requirement for when to start this thread of execution, which will typically be specified by the entity
      that creates this thread of execution. For example, a thread of execution that provides concurrent forward progress guarantees and executes
      tasks from a set of tasks in an arbitrary order, one after the other, satisfies the requirements of parallel forward progress for these
      tasks. — end note]

.. _libcudacxx-extended-api-execution-model-host-threads:

> 

Author: @ericniebler @mhoemmen does the following suggestion address this comment: https://github.com/NVIDIA/cccl/pull/3873/files#r1964097678

```suggestion

The CUDA C++ Programming Langue is an extension of the C++ Programming Language.
This section documents the modifications and extensions to the `[intro.progress] <https://eel.is/c++draft/intro.progress>`__ section of the current `ISO International Standard ISO/IEC 14882 – Programming Language C++ <https://eel.is/c++draft/>`__ draft. 
Modified sections are called out explicitly and their diff is shown in **bold**. 
All other sections are an addition.
```

Reviewer 2: @gonzalobg Looks good!  This definitely addresses my concern.  A couple comments:

1. First line misspells "Language" once.
2. Given that the Working Draft is a continuously changing document, should we consider giving a date?  Alternately, should we use one of the `N????` drafts, that have a fixed text and date?

Author: We give it a date in the Memory Model docs (adjacent .rst to this one), and we haven't update those in a while. 

The current wording incorporates some C++26 changes like `while(1)` being well-defined. 

I think my preference would be to just say "draft" for now, and open an issue to fix this to C++26 when its released (and update the memory model docs to C++26 as well).

Author: I've created https://github.com/NVIDIA/cccl/issues/3898 to track this.

and `std::jthread https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/thread/jthread>`__ is implementation-defined behavior of the host
implementation `[intro.progress] <https://eel.is/c++draft/intro.progress>`__.
General-purpose host implementations should provide _concurrent forward progress_.

If the host implementation provides `_concurrent forward progress_ [intro.progress.7] <https://eel.is/c++draft/intro.progress#7>`__,
then CUDA C++ provides `_parallel forward progress_ [intro.progress.9] <https://eel.is/c++draft/intro.progress#9>`__ for device threads.

.. _libcudacxx-extended-api-execution-model-device-threads:

Device threads
--------------

Once a device thread makes progress:

- If it is part of a `Cooperative Grid <https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-runtime-api/group__CUDART__EXECUTION.html#group__CUDART__EXECUTION_1g504b94170f83285c71031be6d5d15f73>`__,
  all device threads in its grid shall eventually make progress.
- Otherwise, all device threads in its `thread-block cluster <https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-c-programming-guide/index.html#thread-block-clusters>`__

>   shall eventually make progress.

Reviewer 2: > The bullet list is preceded by "Once a device thread makes progress: ". This seems to be repeating that.

Ah, sorry, I missed that.  Never mind : - ) .

> Maybe what's unclear is the "once a device thread makes progress" implying that that device thread has started executing?

I'm actually fine.  I just had forgotten about the top-level clause when I looked at the second point.

  [Note: Threads in other thread-block clusters are not guaranteed to eventually make progress. - end note.]
  [Note: This implies that all device threads within its thread block shall eventually make progress. - end note.]

The order in which device threads make progress is _unspecified_.

> Modify `[intro.progress.1] <https://eel.is/c++draft/intro.progress>`__ as follows (modifications in **bold**):

Author: I think the whole document is a diff to the C++ standard.
This is the only section that modifies things, all other sections "add" new things.

Maybe we should be explaining at the very top level of the document (also maybe worth citing which version of the standard we modify, like we do in the atomics section).

> Modify `[intro.progress.1] <https://eel.is/c++draft/intro.progress>`__ as follows (modifications in **bold**):

Author: See https://github.com/NVIDIA/cccl/pull/3873/files#r1965322609 for the suggested fix.

> Modify `[intro.progress.1] <https://eel.is/c++draft/intro.progress>`__ as follows (modifications in **bold**):

Reviewer 2: This looks good; thank you! : - )

The implementation may assume that any **host** thread will eventually do one of the following:

    1. terminate,
    2. invoke the function `std::this_thread::yield <https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/thread/yield>`__ (`[thread.thread.this] <http://eel.is/c++draft/thread.thread.this>`__),
    3. make a call to a library I/O function,
    4. perform an access through a volatile glvalue,
    5. perform a synchronization operation or an atomic operation, or
    6. continue execution of a trivial infinite loop (`[stmt.iter.general] <http://eel.is/c++draft/stmt.iter.general>`__).

**The implementation may assume that any device thread will eventually do one of the following:**

    1. **terminate**,
    2. **make a call to a library I/O function**,
    3. **perform an access through a volatile glvalue except if the designated object has automatic storage duration, or**

>     4. **perform a synchronization operation or an atomic read operation except if the designated object has automatic storage duration.**

Author: All other sections are additions. I just didn't wanted to write 99% of this document in "bold".

>     4. **perform a synchronization operation or an atomic read operation except if the designated object has automatic storage duration.**

Reviewer 2: That sounds good -- thank you! : - )

  [Note: Some current limitations of device threads relative to host threads are considered
  implementation defects, such as the undefined behavior that arises from device threads
  that eventually only perform volatile or atomic operations on automatic storage duration objects.
  However, other limitations stem from the strictness of the C++ standard, e.g., providing
  forward progress to programs that eventually only perform atomic writes or fences degrades overall

>   performance for little practical benefit. - end note.]

Author: > I'm not sure what a user would do with this information

This allows a user to tell which things we consider bugs already, and which things we consider defects in the standard. That user could then write a paper to improve the standard, arguing that the current standard wording prevents implementations from being conforming (as opposed to just "some implementations have bug"), and reference this document as part of that argument.

>   [Note: Some current limitations of device threads relative to host threads are considered
>   implementation defects, such as the undefined behavior that arises from device threads
>   that eventually only perform volatile or atomic operations on automatic storage duration objects.
>   However, other limitations stem from the strictness of the C++ standard, e.g., providing
>   forward progress to programs that eventually only perform atomic writes or fences degrades overall
>   performance for little practical benefit. - end note.]

Reviewer 2: Thanks @gonzalobg !  Your explanation helped me understand.  May I suggest a slight rewording that clarifies this distinction further?

```suggestion
  [Note: Some current limitations of device threads relative to host threads
  are implementation defects known to us, that we may fix over time.
  Examples include the undefined behavior that arises from device threads
  that eventually only perform volatile or atomic operations
  on automatic storage duration objects.
  However, other limitations of device threads relative to host threads
  are intentional choices.  They enable performance optimizations
  that would not be possible if device threads followed the C++ Standard strictly.
  For example, providing forward progress to programs
  that eventually only perform atomic writes or fences
  would degrade overall performance for little practical benefit. - end note.]
```

>   performance for little practical benefit. - end note.]

Author: Thank you Mark! That sounds much better!

.. dropdown:: Examples of forward progress guarantee differences between host and device threads due to modifications to [intro.progress.1].

    The following examples refer to the itemized sub-clauses of the implementation assumptions for host and device threads above
    using "host.threads.<id>" and "device.threads.<id>", respectively.

    .. code:: cuda
        // Example: Execution.Model.Device.0
        // Outcome: grid eventually terminates per device.threads.4 because the atomic object does not have automatic storage duration.
        __global__ void ex0(cuda::atomic_ref<int, cuda::thread_scope_device> atom) {
            if (threadIdx.x == 0) {
                while(atom.load(cuda::memory_order_relaxed) == 0);
            } else if (threadIdx.x == 1) {
                atom.store(1, cuda::memory_order_relaxed);
            }
        }

    .. code:: cuda
        // Example: Execution.Model.Device.1
        // Allowed outcome: No thread makes progress because device threads don't support host.threads.2.
        __global__ void ex1() {
            while(true) std::this_thread::yield();

>         }

Reviewer 2: Would this even compile?  Perhaps a better question to ask, is how would I spell the equivalent idea in device code?

Author: ```suggestion
        // Example: Execution.Model.Device.1
        // Allowed outcome: No thread makes progress because device threads don't support host.threads.2.
        __global__ void ex1() {
            while(true) cuda::std::this_thread::yield();
        }
```

    .. code:: cuda
        // Example: Execution.Model.Device.2
        // Allowed outcome: No thread makes progress because device threads don't support host.threads.4
        // for objects with automatic storage duration (see exception in device.threads.3).
        __global__ void ex2() {
            volatile bool True = true;
            while(True);
        }

    .. code:: cuda
        // Example: Execution.Model.Device.3
        // Allowed outcome: No thread makes progress because device threads don't support host.threads.5
        // for objects with automatic storage duration (see exception in device.threads.4).
        __global__ void ex3() {
            cuda::atomic<bool, cuda::thread_scope_thread> True = true;
            while(True.load());
        }

    .. code:: cuda
        // Example: Execution.Model.Device.4
        // Allowed outcome: No thread makes progress because device threads don't support host.thread.6.
        __global void ex4() {
            while(true) { /* empty */ }
        }

.. _libcudacxx-extended-api-execution-model-cuda-apis:

CUDA APIs
---------

> Any CUDA API shall eventually either return or ensure at least one device thread makes progress.

Reviewer 2: Example Execution.Module.API.1 below qualifies this with "if the device is empty."  Should we consider adding that qualification here?  If so, should we consider defining what it means for the device to be "empty"?

Examples Execution.Model.API.3 and Execution.Model.API.4 qualify this with the CUDA API needing to be invoked in a spin loop.  Should we consider adding that qualification here?

Author: Does this comment address these issues?
https://github.com/NVIDIA/cccl/pull/3873/files#r1965302291

Reviewer 2: It does; thank you! : - )

CUDA query functions (e.g. `cudaStreamQuery <https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-runtime-api/group__CUDART__STREAM.html#group__CUDART__STREAM_1g2021adeb17905c7ec2a3c1bf125c5435>`__,
`cudaEventQuery <https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-runtime-api/group__CUDART__EVENT.html#group__CUDART__EVENT_1g2bf738909b4a059023537eaa29d8a5b7>`__, etc.) shall not consistently
return ``cudaErrorNotReady`` without a device thread making progress.

[Note: The device thread need not be "related" to the API call, e.g., an API operating on one stream or process may ensure progress of a device thread on another stream or process. - end note.]

> [Note: A simple but not sufficient method to test workloads for CUDA API Forward Progress conformance is to run them with following environment variables set: ``CUDA_DEVICE_MAX_CONNECTIONS=1 CUDA_LAUNCH_BLOCKING=1`` - end note.]

Reviewer 3: if it is insufficient, why mention it here?

Author: How do I test my program conforms to forward progress is a frequently-asked question by users.

Testing as suggested is our recommended way to do that. While insufficient, it will catch many/most issues, and is the only "tool" we provide for this. It is therefore worth documenting somewhere, and for now, this document is the only place in our entire documentation in which we talk about this topic, so "here" seemed better than "nowhere".

If we eventually develop high-level user-documentation for any of this, we should probably expand on this there.

Author: Does the following make it clearer?

```suggestion
[Note: A simple but not sufficient method to test a program for CUDA API Forward Progress conformance is to run it with following environment variables set: ``CUDA_DEVICE_MAX_CONNECTIONS=1 CUDA_LAUNCH_BLOCKING=1`` and check that the program still terminates. 
If it does not, the program may have a Forward Progress bug.
This method, while insufficient, does catch many such Forward Progress bugs. - end note.]
```

Author: @ericniebler resolved, please re-open if this does not address the issue raised.

.. dropdown:: Examples of CUDA API forward progress guarantees.

    .. code:: cuda
        // Example: Execution.Model.API.1

>         // Outcome: if device empty, terminates and returns cudaSuccess.

Reviewer 3: seconding mark here. what does it mean for a device to be empty?

Author: Good point. Does this suggestion clarify it?

```suggestion
        // Outcome: if no other device threads (e.g. from other processes) are making progress,
        // this program terminates and returns cudaSuccess.
```

Reviewer 2: @gonzalobg It does; thank you! : - )  A tiny punctuation fix:

```suggestion
        // Outcome: if no other device threads (e.g., from other processes) are making progress,
        // this program terminates and returns cudaSuccess.
```

>         // Outcome: if device empty, terminates and returns cudaSuccess.

Author: Good point. Does this suggestion clarify it?

```suggestion
        // Outcome: if no other device threads (e.g. from other processes) are making progress,
        // this program terminates and returns cudaSuccess.
```

        // Rationale: CUDA guarantees that if the device is empty:
        // - `cudaDeviceSynchronize` eventually ensures that at least one device-thread makes progress, which implies that eventually `hello_world` grid and one of its device-threads start.
        // - All thread-block threads eventually start (due to "if a device thread makes progress, all other threads in its thread-block cluster eventually make progress").
        // - Once all threads in thread-block arrive at `__syncthreads` barrier, all waiting threads are unblocked.
        // - Therefore all device threads eventually exit the `hello_world`` grid.
        // - And `cudaDeviceSynchronize`` eventually unblocks.
        __global__ void hello_world() { __syncthreads(); }
        int main() {
            hello_world<<<1,2>>>();
            return (int)cudaDeviceSynchronize();
        }

    .. code:: cuda

>         // Example: Execution.Model.API.2

Reviewer 2: I like this example -- thank you! : - )

        }

    .. code:: cuda
        // Example: Execution.Model.API.3
        // Allowed outcome: eventually, no thread makes progress.
        // Rationale: same as Example.Model.API.2, with the addition that a single CUDA query API call does not guarantee
        // the device thread eventually starts, only repeated CUDA query API calls do (see Execution.Model.API.4).
        cuda::atomic<int, cuda::thread_scope_system> flag = 0;
        __global__ void producer() { flag.store(1); }
        int main() {
            cudaHostRegister(&flag, sizeof(flag));
            producer<<<1,1>>>();
            (void)cudaStreamQuery(0);
            while (flag.load() == 0);
            return cudaDeviceSynchronize();
        }

    .. code:: cuda
        // Example: Execution.Model.API.4
        // Outcome: terminates.
        // Rationale: same as Execution.Model.API.3, but this example repeatedly calls
        // a CUDA query API in within the flag spin-loop, which guarantees that the device thread
        // eventually makes progress.
        cuda::atomic<int, cuda::thread_scope_system> flag = 0;
        __global__ void producer() { flag.store(1); }

>         int main() {

Reviewer 3: some blank lines in these examples would make them more readable

            cudaHostRegister(&flag, sizeof(flag));
            producer<<<1,1>>>();
            while (flag.load() == 0) {
                (void)cudaStreamQuery(0);

>             }

Reviewer 2: Is this a bit like driving MPI progress?

Author: I'd guess so, does the MPI standard talk about this somewhere? cc @jeffhammond

Reviewer 2: MPI 4.1 Standard (Section 2.9, "Progress") says:

> All MPI processes are required to **guarantee progress**, i.e., all decoupled MPI activities will eventually be executed. This guarantee is required to be provided during
>
> * blocked MPI procedures, and
> * repeatedly called MPI test procedures (see below) that return `flag=false`.

It defines "decoupled MPI activities" as follows.

> Within each MPI process parts of the communication or parallel I/O pattern are executed within the MPI procedure calls that belong to the operation in that MPI process, whereas other parts are **decoupled MPI activities**, i.e., they may be executed within an additional progress thread, offloaded to the network interface controller (NIC), or executed within other MPI procedure calls that are not semantically related to the given communication or parallel I/O pattern.

It defines "blocked MPI procedure" as follows.

> An MPI procedure invocation is **blocked** if it delays its return until some specific activity or state-change has occurred in another MPI process.

Section 2.9 further distinguishes "strong process" from "weak progress."

> **Strong progress** is provided by an MPI implementation if all _local_ procedures return independently of MPI procedure calls in other MPI processes (operation-related or not). An MPI implementation provides **weak progress** if it does not provide _strong progress_.

It defines "local" and "nonlocal" procedure calls as follows.

> An MPI procedure call that is _blocked_ can be
>
> * a _nonlocal_ MPI procedure call that delays its return until a specific semantically-related MPI call on another MPI process, or
> * a _local_ MPI procedure call that delays its return until some unspecific MPI call in another MPI process causes a specific state-change in that other MPI process, or
> * an MPI finalization procedure (`MPI_FINALIZE` or `MPI_SESSION_FINALIZE`) that delays its return or exit because this MPI finalization must guarantee that all decoupled MPI activities that are related to that MPI finalization call in the calling MPI process will be executed before this MPI finalization is finished....

Author: Thanks!

            return cudaDeviceSynchronize();
        }

.. _libcudacxx-extended-api-execution-model-stream-ordering:

Stream and event ordering
-------------------------

> A device-thread shall not make progress if it is dependent on termination of one or more unterminated device-threads or tasks via CUDA streams and/or events.

Reviewer 2: Regarding "shall not make progress," does that mean "it definitely will not" or "it might not but it might"?  The example's comments suggest the latter -- that is, whether or not it makes progress depends on scheduling order, which is unspecified.

Author: It means we guarantee it does not make progress. In the example "Execution.Model.Stream.1" below with two kernels on the same stream, this sentence guarantees that no thread of the second kernel makes progress until all threads from the first kernel terminate.

Reviewer 2: That answers my question -- thanks Gonzalo! : - )

> A device-thread shall not make progress if it is dependent on termination of one or more unterminated device-threads or tasks via CUDA streams and/or events.

Reviewer 3: what is a "task" here?

Author: CUDA doesn't currently have a definition for "operations" on a stream. We call them tasks here and in some other parts of our documentation, but we don't define that anywhere. Some other parts of the documentation call them "Commands" as clarified in the note below.

We should probably properly define that somewhere, e.g., in the CUDA Driver/Runtime documentation, and then just update this here and reference that.

Author: See https://github.com/NVIDIA/cccl/pull/3873#discussion_r1965343171 for a suggestion, let me know if that resolves this.

[Note: This excludes dependencies such as Programmatic Dependent Launch or Launch Completion which do not encompass termination of the dependency. - end note.]

> [Note: Tasks are also known as `Commands <https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-c-programming-guide/index.html#streams>`__. - end note. ]

Author: ```suggestion
[Note: Tasks are also referred to as `Commands <https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-c-programming-guide/index.html#streams>`__. - end note. ]
```

> [Note: Tasks are also referred to as `Commands <https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-c-programming-guide/index.html#streams>`__. - end note. ]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Note: Tasks are also referred to as `Commands <https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-c-programming-guide/index.html#streams>`__. - end note.]
```

> A device-thread shall not make progress if it is dependent on termination of one or more unterminated device-threads or tasks via CUDA streams and/or events.
> 
> [Note: This excludes dependencies such as Programmatic Dependent Launch or Launch Completion which do not encompass termination of the dependency. - end note.]
> 
> [Note: Tasks are also referred to as `Commands <https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-c-programming-guide/index.html#streams>`__. - end note.]

Author: @ericniebler Does this resolve https://github.com/NVIDIA/cccl/pull/3873/files#r1964536079 and make it clearer?

```suggestion
A device-thread shall not make progress if it is dependent on the completion of a CUDA stream `Command <https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-c-programming-guide/index.html#streams>`__.

[Note: CUDA Stream Commands include, among others, CUDA Event Commands and CUDA Kernel Launch Commands, but exclude, among others, memory dependencies (e.g. via atomic memory operations) and dependencies due to Programmatic Dependent Launch or Launch Completion. - end note.]
```
```

Author: @ericniebler resolving, please re-open if it does not address the issue raised.

> .. dropdown:: Examples of CUDA API forward progress guarantees due to Stream and event ordering

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. dropdown:: Examples of CUDA API forward progress guarantees due to stream and event ordering
```

    .. code:: cuda
        // Example: Execution.Model.Stream.0
        // Allowed outcome: eventually, no thread makes progress.
        // Rationale: while CUDA guarantees that one device thread makes progress, since there
        // is no dependency between `first` and `second`, it does not guarantee which thread,
        // and therefore it could always pick the device thread from `second`, which then never
        // unblocks from the spin-loop.
        // That is, `second` may starve `first`.
        cuda::atomic<int, cuda::thread_scope_system> flag = 0;

>         __global__ void first() { flag.store(1, rlx); }

Author: ```suggestion
        __global__ void first() { flag.store(1, cuda::memory_order_relaxed); }
```

>         __global__ void second() { while(flag.load(rlx) == 0) {} }

Reviewer 3: what is `rlx`?

Author: A typo! 

```suggestion
        __global__ void second() { while(flag.load(cuda::memory_order_relaxed) == 0) {} }
```

        int main() {
            cudaHostRegister(&flag, sizeof(flag));
            cudaStream_t s0, s1;
            cudaStreamCreate(&s0);
            cudaStreamCreate(&s1);
            first<<<1,1,0,s0>>>();
            second<<<1,1,0,s1>>>();
            return cudaDeviceSynchronize();
        }

    .. code:: cuda
        // Example: Execution.Model.Stream.1
        // Outcome: terminates.
        // Rationale: same as Execution.Model.Stream.0, but this example has a stream dependency
        // between first and second, which requires CUDA to run the grids in order.
        cuda::atomic<int, cuda::thread_scope_system> flag = 0;

>         __global__ void first() { flag.store(1, rlx); }
>         __global__ void second() { while(flag.load(rlx) == 0) {} }

Author: ```suggestion
        __global__ void first() { flag.store(1, cuda::memory_order_relaxed); }
        __global__ void second() { while(flag.load(cuda::memory_order_relaxed) == 0) {} }
```

.. _libcudacxx-extended-api-execution-model:

Execution model
===============

CUDA C++ aims to provide `_parallel forward progress_ [intro.progress.9] <https://eel.is/c++draft/intro.progress#9>`__

> for all device threads of execution, making the parallelization of pre-existing C++ applications with CUDA C++ straightforward.

Author: ```suggestion
for all device threads of execution, facilitating the parallelization of pre-existing C++ applications with CUDA C++.
```

------------

The forward-progress provided by threads of execution created by the host implementation to
execute `main <https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/main_function>`__, `std::thread <https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/thread/thread>`__,
and `std::jthread https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/thread/jthread>`__ is implementation-defined behavior of the host
implementation `[intro.progress] <https://eel.is/c++draft/intro.progress>`__.
General-purpose host implementations should provide _concurrent forward progress_.

If the host implementation provides `_concurrent forward progress_ [intro.progress.7] <https://eel.is/c++draft/intro.progress#7>`__,
then CUDA C++ provides `_parallel forward progress_ [intro.progress.9] <https://eel.is/c++draft/intro.progress#9>`__ for device threads.

.. _libcudacxx-extended-api-execution-model-device-threads:

Device threads
--------------

Once a device thread makes progress:

- If the device thread is part of a `Cooperative Grid <https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-runtime-api/group__CUDART__EXECUTION.html#group__CUDART__EXECUTION_1g504b94170f83285c71031be6d5d15f73>`__,
  then all device threads in its grid shall eventually make progress.

> _ Otherwise, all device threads in its `thread-block cluster <https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-c-programming-guide/index.html#thread-block-clusters>`__

Author: ```suggestion
- Otherwise, all device threads in its `thread-block cluster <https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-c-programming-guide/index.html#thread-block-clusters>`__
```

> _ Otherwise, all device threads in its `thread-block cluster <https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-c-programming-guide/index.html#thread-block-clusters>`__ 

Author: ```suggestion
- Otherwise, all device threads in its `thread-block cluster <https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-c-programming-guide/index.html#thread-block-clusters>`__ 
```

> - If the device thread is part of a `Cooperative Grid <https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-runtime-api/group__CUDART__EXECUTION.html#group__CUDART__EXECUTION_1g504b94170f83285c71031be6d5d15f73>`__,
>   then all device threads in its grid shall eventually make progress.
> - Otherwise, all device threads in its `thread-block cluster <https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-c-programming-guide/index.html#thread-block-clusters>`__
>   shall eventually make progress.

Author: ```suggestion
- If it is part of a `Cooperative Grid <https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-runtime-api/group__CUDART__EXECUTION.html#group__CUDART__EXECUTION_1g504b94170f83285c71031be6d5d15f73>`__,
  all device threads in its grid shall eventually make progress.
- Otherwise, all device threads in its `thread-block cluster <https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-c-programming-guide/index.html#thread-block-clusters>`__
  shall eventually make progress.
```

  [Note: Threads in other thread-block clusters are not guaranteed to eventually make progress. - end note.]

>   [Note: This implies that all device-threads in its thread block shall eventually make progress. - end note.]

Author: ```suggestion
  [Note: This implies that all device threads within its thread block shall eventually make progress. - end note.]
```

> The order in which device threads eventually get a chance to make progress is _unspecified_.

Author: ```suggestion
The order in which device threads make progress is _unspecified_.
```

    3. make a call to a library I/O function,
    4. perform an access through a volatile glvalue,
    5. perform a synchronization operation or an atomic operation, or
    6. continue execution of a trivial infinite loop (`[stmt.iter.general] <http://eel.is/c++draft/stmt.iter.general>`__).

**The implementation may assume that any device thread will eventually do one of the following:**

    1. **terminate**,
    2. **make a call to a library I/O function**,
    3. **perform an access through a volatile glvalue except if the designated object has automatic storage duration, or**
    4. **perform a synchronization operation or an atomic read operation except if the designated object has automatic storage duration.**

  [Note: We consider some of the current limitations of device threads with respect to host
  threads implementation bugs, e.g., the undefined behavior introduced by programs that
  eventually only perform volatile or atomic operations on objects with automatic storage
  duration. However, we consider that some of the limitations are due to the C++ standard
  currently being too strict, and this resulting in the performance of common workloads

>   being degraded to provide forward progress to “useless” programs, e.g., the undefined

Author: ```suggestion
  being degraded to provide forward progress to not very useful programs, e.g., the undefined
```

>   [Note: We consider some of the current limitations of device threads with respect to host
>   threads implementation bugs, e.g., the undefined behavior introduced by programs that
>   eventually only perform volatile or atomic operations on objects with automatic storage
>   duration. However, we consider that some of the limitations are due to the C++ standard
>   currently being too strict, and this resulting in the performance of common workloads
>   being degraded to provide forward progress to “useless” programs, e.g., the undefined
>   behavior introduced by programs that eventually only perform atomic write operations
>   or fences. - end note.]

Author: ```suggestion
  [Note: Some current limitations of device threads relative to host threads are considered
  implementation defects, such as the undefined behavior that arises from device threads
  that eventually only performs volatile or atomic operations on automatic storage duration objects.
  However, other limitations stem from the strictness of the C++ standard, e.g., providing
  forward progress to programs that eventually only perform atomic writes or fences degrades overall
  performance for little practical benefit. - end note.]
```

>     [Note: We consider some of the current limitations of device threads with respect to host 
>     threads implementation bugs, e.g., the undefined behavior introduced by programs that 
>     eventually only perform volatile or atomic operations on objects with automatic storage 
>     duration. However, we consider that some of the limitations are due to the C++ standard
>     currently being too strict, and this resulting in the performance of common workloads
>     being degraded to provide forward progress to “useless” programs, e.g., the undefined
>     behavior introduced by programs that eventually only perform atomic write operations
>     or fences. - end note.]

Author: ```suggestion
  [Note: We consider some of the current limitations of device threads with respect to host 
  threads implementation bugs, e.g., the undefined behavior introduced by programs that 
  eventually only perform volatile or atomic operations on objects with automatic storage 
  duration. However, we consider that some of the limitations are due to the C++ standard
  currently being too strict, and this resulting in the performance of common workloads
  being degraded to provide forward progress to “useless” programs, e.g., the undefined
  behavior introduced by programs that eventually only perform atomic write operations
  or fences. - end note.]
```

        // a CUDA query API in within the flag spin-loop, which guarantees that the device thread
        // eventually makes progress.
        cuda::atomic<int, cuda::thread_scope_system> flag = 0;
        __global__ void producer() { flag.store(1); }
        int main() {
            cudaHostRegister(&flag, sizeof(flag));
            producer<<<1,1>>>();
            while (flag.load() == 0) {
                (void)cudaStreamQuery(0);
            }
            return cudaDeviceSynchronize();
        }

.. _libcudacxx-extended-api-execution-model-stream-ordering:

Stream and event ordering
-------------------------

A device-thread shall not make progress if it is dependent on termination of one or more unterminated device-threads or tasks via CUDA streams and/or events.

[Note: This excludes dependencies such as Programmatic Dependent Launch or Launch Completion which do not encompass termination of the dependency. - end note.]

[Note: Tasks are also known as `Commands <https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-c-programming-guide/index.html#streams>`__. - end note. ]

.. dropdown:: Examples of CUDA API forward progress guarantees due to Stream and event ordering

    .. code:: cuda

>         // Example: Exeuction.Model.Stream.0

Author: ```suggestion
        // Example: Execution.Model.Stream.0
```

        // Allowed outcome: eventually, no thread makes progress.
        // Rationale: while CUDA guarantees that one device thread makes progress, since there
        // is no dependency between `first` and `second`, it does not guarantee which thread,
        // and therefore it could always pick the device thread from `second`, which then never
        // unblocks from the spin-loop.
        // That is, `second` may starve `first`.
        cuda::atomic<int, cuda::thread_scope_system> flag = 0;
        __global__ void first() { flag.store(1, rlx); }
        __global__ void second() { while(flag.load(rlx) == 0) {} }
        int main() {
            cudaHostRegister(&flag, sizeof(flag));
            cudaStream_t s0, s1;
            cudaStreamCreate(&s0);
            cudaStreamCreate(&s1);
            first<<<1,1,0,s0>>>();
            second<<<1,1,0,s1>>>();
            return cudaDeviceSynchronize();
        }

    .. code:: cuda

>         // Example: Exeuction.Model.Stream.1

Author: ```suggestion
        // Example: Execution.Model.Stream.1
```

      the thread will eventually make progress if it has not yet executed any execution step; once this thread has executed a step,
      it provides concurrent forward progress guarantees.

      [Note 6: This does not specify a requirement for when to start this thread of execution, which will typically be specified by the entity
      that creates this thread of execution. For example, a thread of execution that provides concurrent forward progress guarantees and executes
      tasks from a set of tasks in an arbitrary order, one after the other, satisfies the requirements of parallel forward progress for these
      tasks. — end note]

.. _libcudacxx-extended-api-execution-model-host-threads:

The CUDA C++ Programming Language is an extension of the C++ Programming Language.
This section documents the modifications and extensions to the `[intro.progress] <https://eel.is/c++draft/intro.progress>`__ section of the current `ISO International Standard ISO/IEC 14882 – Programming Language C++ <https://eel.is/c++draft/>`__ draft.
Modified sections are called out explicitly and their diff is shown in **bold**.
All other sections are additions.

> Host threads

Author: ```suggestion

Host threads
```
